remove `c_nonce` from the token endpoint response (#381)
openid/OpenID4VCI: openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.md

This specification defines an API for Credential issuance provided by a Credential Issuer. The API is comprised of the following endpoints:

* A mandatory Credential Endpoint from which Credentials can be issued (see (#credential-endpoint)). From this endpoint, one Credential, or multiple Credentials with the same Credential Dataset can be issued in one request.

> * An optional Nonce Endpoint from which a fresh a `c_nonce` value can be obtained to be used in proof of possession of key material in a subsequent request to the Credential Endpoint (see (#nonce-endpoint)).

Author: thank you

* A new authorization details [@!RFC9396] type `openid_credential` is defined to convey the details about the Credentials (including Credential Dataset, Credential Formats, and Credential types) the Wallet wants to obtain (see (#authorization-details)).
* Client metadata is used to convey the Wallet's metadata. The new Client metadata parameter `credential_offer_endpoint` is added to allow a Wallet (acting as OAuth 2.0 client) to publish its Credential Offer Endpoint (see (#client-metadata)).
* Authorization Endpoint: The additional parameter `issuer_state` is added to convey state in the context of processing an issuer-initiated Credential Offer (see (#credential-authz-request)). Additional parameters `wallet_issuer` and `user_hint` are added to enable the Credential Issuer to request Verifiable Presentations from the calling Wallet during Authorization Request processing.

> * Token Endpoint: Optional response parameters `c_nonce` and `c_nonce_expires_in` are added to the Token Endpoint, and Credential Endpoint to provide the Client with a nonce to be used for proof of possession of key material in a subsequent request to the Credential Endpoint (see (#token-response)).

Reviewer: I think we need to keep the part on credential endpoint extended to support c_nonce
```
* Credential Endpoint: Optional response parameters `c_nonce` and `c_nonce_expires_in` are added to the Credential Endpoint to provide the Client with a nonce to be used for proof of possession of key material in a subsequent request to the Credential Endpoint.
```

Author: The credential endpoint is not being extend. It is introduced by this specification.

}
```

# Nonce Endpoint {#nonce-endpoint}

> A Credential Issuer that requires `c_nonce` values to be incorporated into proofs in the Credential Request (see (#credential-request)) MUST offer a Nonce Endpoint. This endpoint allows a Client to acquire a fresh `c_nonce` value without the overhead of a full Credential Request.

Reviewer: improve readability
```suggestion
This endpoint allows a Client to acquire a fresh `c_nonce` value without the overhead of a full Credential Request. A Credential Issuer that requires `c_nonce` values to be incorporated into proofs in the Credential Request (see (#credential-request)) MUST offer a Nonce Endpoint.
```
but also do we really want to mandate nonce endpoint for all issuers that require c_nonce? than why keep an option to return c_nonce in credential response?

Author: was trying to keep the scope of the changes to something that had been agreed on while also accommodating Paul's request for changes

Author: while also keeping my own frustration in check about the fact that these are all things that were only hidden by the nonce from token endpoint but have existed all along so why do they always and only come up in the context of trying to make an improvement

Author: Also removing the ability to have send a c_nonce in the credential response would probably be a breaking change by most measures and it's unclear if the WG has the appetite for that.

> The `nonce_endpoint` Credential Issuer Metadata parameter, as defined in (#credential-issuer-parameters), contains the URL of the Credential Issuer's Nonce Endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Credential Issuer indicates support for this endpoint using `nonce_endpoint` Credential Issuer Metadata parameter, as defined in (#credential-issuer-parameters), which contains the URL of the Credential Issuer's Nonce Endpoint.
```
I was not sure what is the purpose of the original sentence...

Author: to say where the actual endpoint value can be found

## Nonce Request {#nonce-request}

> A request for a nonce is made by sending an HTTP GET request to the URL provided in the `nonce_endpoint` Credential Issuer Metadata parameter.

Reviewer 2: is there any benefit of using GET over POST?

Author: is there any benefit of using POST over GET?

Reviewer 2: In OpenID4VP having the request_uri with POST in the first place would have made things easier instead of adding the POST method later

Author: A lot of IMHO very questionable things led to request_uri with POST, which itself is IMHO a very awkward construct. And other than being in the umbrella of OpenID4VP, I don't see what they have in common. 

Using a GET to get something seemed like the most straightforward thing to do.

Reviewer 2: I would argue most calls in OpenID4VCI are POST calls?

Author: > I would argue most calls in OpenID4VCI are POST calls?

Because they send data in the request.

Reviewer 3: I would agree with GET here as well unless we already have a clear idea that we will need to send data (POST)

Reviewer 2: Not a hill I want to die on, was just a question coming to my mind. If others think GET is better, I'm fine to close this conversation

Author: Resolving conversation to avoid any deaths on hills.

Reviewer 4: I filed https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/issues/395

No reason to delay this PR, but I would like to be able to use this endpoint without needing to pull in all of OIDC4VCI.

> 

Reviewer 5: As it is, this endpoint does not uses any authentication or access control. Any HTTP client (that doesn't even need to be an OAuth client) can use it, right?
My concern is the potential for DoS, namely if a GET produces meaningful state changes (e.g. adding entries to a nonces table somewhere).

We could have the endpoint protected by the same access token used to request the credential (I didn't identify any use case where the wallet doesn't have such AT and still needs to access this endpoint).

Author: "Brian also clarified that the Nonce Endpoint being unprotected follows a previous WG meeting decision." - quoting you paraphrasing me :) from https://lists.openid.net/pipermail/openid-specs-digital-credentials-protocols/Week-of-Mon-20240909/000448.html

Below is a non-normative example of a Nonce Request:

```
GET /nonce HTTP/1.1
Host: credential-issuer.example.com
```

## Nonce Response {#nonce-response}

> The Credential Issuer provides a nonce value in the HTTP response with a 2xx status code and the following parameters included as top-level members in the message body of the HTTP response using the application/json media type:

Reviewer: why not 200?

Author: Because I was pretty sure someone would put forth the belief that a 201 is more true to Roy Fielding's vision and I can see arguments on both sides but am wholly uninterested in having them while I don't think it actually matters at all and 2xx will let people do whatever.

* `c_nonce`: REQUIRED. String containing a nonce to be used when creating a proof of possession of the key proof (see (#credential-request)).
* `c_nonce_expires_in`: OPTIONAL. Number denoting the lifetime in seconds of the `c_nonce`.

Below is a non-normative example of a Nonce Response:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

> Cache-Control: no-store

Author: probably, yeah. I'll add something to that effect.

> Cache-Control: no-store

Author: see what is now line 734 above that was added with 0e0d18813bb49635747e856751e974e23dfa9750

}
```

# Nonce Endpoint {#nonce-endpoint}

> This endpoint allows a Client to acquire a fresh `c_nonce` value without the overhead of a full Credential Request. A Credential Issuer that requires `c_nonce` values to be incorporated into proofs in the Credential Request (see (#credential-request)) MUST offer a Nonce Endpoint.

Reviewer 5: What is the meaning of `fresh` in this context? A nonce that is valid (i.e. usable) at the time it was issued? Or does this require two distinct requests to provide two distinct nonces?

Reviewer 6: yes, since a nonce is no more than once we assume that each request return an unique and fresh nonce value. I suppose that the term "fresh" made this implicit. I see space to replace it with something more explicit and with few words.

Reviewer: discussed on the WG call
> fresh -> usable or valid at the time of issuance

> This endpoint allows a Client to acquire a fresh `c_nonce` value without the overhead of a full Credential Request. A Credential Issuer that requires `c_nonce` values to be incorporated into proofs in the Credential Request (see (#credential-request)) MUST offer a Nonce Endpoint.

Reviewer 7: > without the overhead of a full Credential Request

I guess this refers to the "nonce by error" delivery mechanism, but this comes later in the text so it might be confusing to phrase it like this. Maybe we could drop this part?

```suggestion
This endpoint allows a Client to acquire a fresh `c_nonce` value. A Credential Issuer that requires `c_nonce` values to be incorporated into proofs in the Credential Request (see (#credential-request)) MUST offer a Nonce Endpoint.
```

Author: it was a nod to the folks who find the "nonce by error" delivery mechanism so deeply objectionable and I'd prefer to keep it until such time as #393 is acted on.

The `nonce_endpoint` Credential Issuer Metadata parameter, as defined in (#credential-issuer-parameters), contains the URL of the Credential Issuer's Nonce Endpoint.

## Nonce Request {#nonce-request}

A request for a nonce is made by sending an HTTP GET request to the URL provided in the `nonce_endpoint` Credential Issuer Metadata parameter.

Below is a non-normative example of a Nonce Request:

```

> GET /nonce HTTP/1.1

Reviewer 8: Wouldn't a POST request be more appropriate?

Reviewer 2: +1, I tried to push in this direction as well: https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/381#discussion_r1752363400

Reviewer: I didn't realize this was GET. my suggestion has been POST. In german wallet project we have been prototyping with POST and it works well https://bmi.usercontent.opencode.de/eudi-wallet/eidas-2.0-architekturkonzept/flows/PID-IssuerSigned-cloud/#issuer-session-endpoint-at-the-pid-provider

Author: > Wouldn't a POST request be more appropriate? 

No.

> I mean the endpoint is supposed to provide a new/different value with every response and the result should not be cached (in my opinion).

That's why it was made not cacheable in the example https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/381/files#diff-1f424614b35a9899813079f1b1f6218631a2aedd993368ccb89bb81a9eda0289R741 and text https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/381/files#diff-1f424614b35a9899813079f1b1f6218631a2aedd993368ccb89bb81a9eda0289R734

Author: > +1, I tried to push in this direction as well: [#381 (comment)](https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/381#discussion_r1752363400)

My naive feeling that using a GET to get some data is the most straightforward way to get the data remained unchanged by that discussion over the course of the last two weeks.

Reviewer 7: My 2 cents for what they are worth,

If we asked the question "is this call safe (i.e. is it read-only)" I think the answer would be "maybe". Safe calls shouldn't alter the state of the server in any way but without knowing how the server implements the nonce endpoint we would not know the answer to the question.

If we asked the question "is this call idempotent" I think we would also get a "maybe".  Client could do this call just to "fetch a value" which might not assume any intention of a side-effect, and from the perspective of the server it would depend on the implementation.

I do see the point in making it a GET because it is technically just fetching a random value, but there might be an embedded assumption here that this random value is a prerequisite for some other steps, and that getting a nonce be viewed as setting up a state that needs to be validated by the server.

One could argue that it might be safer to make this a `POST` because this would communicate that the call might not be safe or idempotent and that subsequent calls could cause load, burden, and side-effects for the server.

Author: I can see arguments for both as well but was really trying to avoid them entirely with a simple (maybe simplistic) approach.

Author: but avoidance didn't work and so f7b4dc8e816a99f8ab3568be14ea62b4446c822f Removed the HTTP method specificity from the Nonce Request text and change the example from GET to POST

Reviewer 8: After reading the comments and listening to the discussions, I'm ok with GET or POST, but we need to pick one.

Author: as discussed on the call - it's POST now https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/381/commits/55c8388480cfa5daee7396954283ef34cb606c66

Host: credential-issuer.example.com
```

## Nonce Response {#nonce-response}

The Credential Issuer provides a nonce value in the HTTP response with a 2xx status code and the following parameters included as top-level members in the message body of the HTTP response using the application/json media type:

> * `c_nonce`: REQUIRED. String containing a nonce to be used when creating a proof of possession of the key proof (see (#credential-request)).

Reviewer 6: I suggest to rename c_nonce to nonce, making the nonce endpoint of general purpose. A nonce is issued by an entity for a specific scope known to its issuer, we don't need to use a particular member name to say that it is a credential nonce, it's a only nonce

nonce and nonce_expires_in would be enough from my perspective, allowing the nonce endpoint to be a general and reusable endpoint within the OAuth framework

Author: A general and reusable endpoint within the OAuth framework was in no way a goal of this work. Not at all. 

And I used c_nonce (a name that I honestly think is terrible for many reasons) to allow for this PR to fit into the broader document more easily.

Reviewer 6: Okay, since this Nonce Endpoint is specifically tailored for credential issuance within the sole scope of the OpenID4VCI specs, it would make sense to rename the endpoint metadata parameter from `nonce_endpoint` to `credential_nonce_endpoint`.

In this way, other nonce endpoints created for other OpenID/IETF specs will not collide with this one.
The related section should therefore be renamed to "Credential Nonce Endpoint," adding "Credential" as a prefix to contextualize its scope.

Author: As @jogu points out (thanks @jogu!) there is no problem with collision because this endpoint is at the credential issuer. 

This seems to be in the same vein of what I said about this in slack to you @peppelinux yesterday but bears repenting, "the context is totally different."

Reviewer 6: bo-ring :-)

Reviewer 6: I menat IANA metadata registry

https://www.iana.org/assignments/oauth-parameters/oauth-parameters.xhtml

OAuth Authorization Server Metadata

nonce_endpoint might collide over there, yes different contexts (openid != IETF) but if this endpoint is specialized for credential issuance it would be better to give to it a name pointing exactly and esplicitly in this way

Author: that context is still totally different

Author: after a maybe productive but definitely not appropriate side discussion about this - I think we can agree to disagree

Reviewer 9: > I menat IANA metadata registry
> 
> https://www.iana.org/assignments/oauth-parameters/oauth-parameters.xhtml
> 
> OAuth Authorization Server Metadata
> 
> nonce_endpoint might collide over there, yes different contexts (openid != IETF) but if this endpoint is specialized for credential issuance it would be better to give to it a name pointing exactly and esplicitly in this way

Just to try to clarify, the nonce endpoint here is part of the issuer metadata. We will not be making an IANA registration for nonce_endpoint in the OAuth Authorization Server Metadata because we're not defining a nonce endpoint for the authorization server. The suggested nonce_endpoint is (technically) a resource server endpoint as that's how we define the credential issuer.

Adding nonce_endpoint here would not prevent the OAuth WG defining a nonce endpoint for authorization servers, nor would it conflict with any such endpoint. It also wouldn't stop the OAuth WG defining a general nonce endpoint for resource servers should they choose to do so, as resource server metadata would also not have a name space that overlaps with credential issuer metadata (i.e. you could have a nonce endpoint defined in `.well-known/oauth-resource server` and a potentially different nonce endpoint defined in `/.well-known/openid-credential-issuer`.

> * `c_nonce_expires_in`: OPTIONAL. Number denoting the lifetime in seconds of the `c_nonce`.

Author: how about this? 
```suggestion
* `c_nonce_expires_in`: OPTIONAL. Number denoting the lifetime in seconds of the `c_nonce`. This value serves only as a hint to the client, indicating how long the Credential Issuer is likely to accept the `c_nonce` as valid.
```

> * `c_nonce_expires_in`: OPTIONAL. Number denoting the lifetime in seconds of the `c_nonce`.

Author: going with the addition of "This value serves only as a hint to the client, indicating how long the Credential Issuer is likely to accept the `c_nonce` as valid."

> * `c_nonce_expires_in`: OPTIONAL. Number denoting the lifetime in seconds of the `c_nonce`. This value serves only as a hint to the client, indicating how long the Credential Issuer is likely to accept the `c_nonce` as valid.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* `c_nonce_expires_in`: OPTIONAL. Number denoting the lifetime in seconds of the `c_nonce`. This value serves only as a hint to the Client, indicating how long the Credential Issuer is likely to accept the `c_nonce` as valid.
```

> Due to the temporal and contextually sensitive nature of the `c_nonce` value, the Credential Issuer MUST make the response uncacheable by adding a `Cache-Control` header field including the value `no-store`.

Reviewer 5: Perhaps this text could be a bit more lenient, namely to allow cases where the same `c_nonce` can be cached for a small amount of time (via the `max-age` value on the `Cache-Control`).
```suggestion
Due to the temporal and contextually sensitive nature of the `c_nonce` value, the Credential Issuer MUST explicitly define the allowed caching for the response, for instance by adding the `Cache-Control` header with the `no-store` value, if the response must be uncacheable.
```

Author: I don't think that should be accounted for at the HTTP layer of cache.

Author: I mean, sure the client will hold onto the thing so it can use it on a subsequent credential request but that's not something that should be conveyed at the HTTP cache level.

Reviewer 7: if we allow max-age I think we just define the `nonce_expires_in` on an HTTP level

Author: or not at any level https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/issues/394

Author: by which i mean, it's not appropriate at the HTTP layer and it's not needed at the application layer so why have it at all?

}
```

# Nonce Endpoint {#nonce-endpoint}

This endpoint allows a Client to acquire a fresh `c_nonce` value without the overhead of a full Credential Request. A Credential Issuer that requires `c_nonce` values to be incorporated into proofs in the Credential Request (see (#credential-request)) MUST offer a Nonce Endpoint.

The `nonce_endpoint` Credential Issuer Metadata parameter, as defined in (#credential-issuer-parameters), contains the URL of the Credential Issuer's Nonce Endpoint.

## Nonce Request {#nonce-request}

> A request for a nonce is made by sending an HTTP request to the URL provided in the `nonce_endpoint` Credential Issuer Metadata parameter.

Author: ```suggestion
A request for a nonce is made by sending an HTTP POST request to the URL provided in the `nonce_endpoint` Credential Issuer Metadata parameter.
```

The `proof_type` parameter is an extension point that enables the use of different types of proofs for different cryptographic schemes.

The proof(s) in the `proof` or  `proofs` parameter MUST incorporate the Credential Issuer Identifier (audience), and optionally a `c_nonce` value generated by the Credential Issuer to allow the Credential Issuer to detect replay. The way that data is incorporated depends on the key proof type. In a JWT, for example, the `c_nonce` value is conveyed in the `nonce` claim, whereas the audience is conveyed in the `aud` claim. In a Linked Data proof, for example, the `c_nonce` is included as the `challenge` element in the key proof object and the Credential Issuer (the intended audience) is included as the `domain` element.

> The initial `c_nonce` value can be returned in a Nonce Response as defined in (#nonce-response), or in a Credential Error Response as defined in (#issuer-provided-nonce).

Reviewer 7: a nitpick, I think that the nonce from the nonce endpoint is fetched while the nonce in the error response is returned

Author: I am unable to see the distinction.

The Credential Issuer MAY provide the Client with a `c_nonce` as defined in (#credential-response) in a Credential Error Response using `invalid_proof` error code defined in (#credential-error-response) if the Credential Issuer Metadata contains `proof_types_supported` indicating a key proof is required for the requested Credential. Depending on the Credential Issuer policy, this occurs if they receive a Credential Request without a `c_nonce` or with an invalid `c_nonce` value included in the proof(s) in the `proof` or `proofs` parameter.

> If the Client has not received a `c_nonce` and the Credential Issuer Metadata contains `proof_types_supported` indicating a key proof is required for the requested Credential, the Client can send a Credential Request that contains a `proof` or `proofs` parameter that is fully valid but does not include a `c_nonce` value. It is the Credential Issuer policy whether or not a `c_nonce` value is required in the key proofs.

Reviewer 8: When is this paragraph apply? I'm asking since the client can always obtain a c_nonce from the nonce endpoint.

Reviewer 2: +1, I was trying to push in this direction as well: https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/pull/381#issuecomment-2366932177

Author: As I've tried to convey in comments on this PR and in calls over the course of the last month, I attempted to keep the scope of this change narrow so as to hopefully make it acceptable to the wide range of opinions and oftentimes irregular participation of the WG members. I have clearly failed in my efforts. I believe the text in question here was written recently by @awoie and because it is "Credential Issuer policy whether or not a `c_nonce` value is required in the key proofs" and a "Client can send a Credential Request that contains a `proof` or `proofs` parameter that is fully valid but does not include a `c_nonce` value" it seemed like it applied enough to not delete it.

Reviewer 8: One reason why I requested the addition of the nonce endpoint was to avoid this kind of incomplete request just to trigger the provision of a fresh nonce. The wallet know that it needs a nonce, so it can directly request it from the nonce endpoint. 
I would suggest to delete this paragraph. If needed, similar text should be added  

```
If the Client is not in possession of a valid `c_nonce` and the Credential Issuer Metadata contains `proof_types_supported` indicating a key proof is required for the requested Credential, the Client MUST obtain a fresh nonce from the nonce endpoint. 
```

Reviewer 8: So how does the wallet know it needs to include a proof?

Reviewer 7: I think that the current text says that the presence of `proof_types_supported` in the metadata indicates that the prof is required in the request

https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VCI/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-wg-draft.html#name-credential-issuer-provided-

Reviewer 9: I think I now understand @tlodderstedt's point.

Some of this overlaps with https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VCI/issues/393 but not completely.

How do people feel about this making the use of the nonce_endpoint by the client mandatory if it's present and a nonce is required:

```suggestion
If the Credential Issuer Metadata contains a `nonce_endpoint` and a `proof_types_supported` indicating a key proof is required for the requested Credential, the Client MUST obtain a `c_nonce` value from the `nonce_endpoint` and send a Credential Request that contains a `proof` or `proofs` parameter that includes a `c_nonce` value. It is the Credential Issuer policy whether or not a `c_nonce` value is required in the key proofs.
```

Reviewer 8: If I get it right, the issuer would signal the requirement to add the nonce to the proof by the existence of its nonce endpoint. 
That's ok with me.

Reviewer 9: Correct, that is my suggestion. If a issuer requires a nonce for the proofs for some credentials and not others (not sure if this is a likely case) then this may end up with the client provided a nonce unnecessarily, but that doesn't really hurt anything.

Reviewer 10: I support this text. It clarifies how the c_nonce should work

Author: the situation was supposed to be accounted for by the text "A Credential Issuer that requires `c_nonce` values to be incorporated into proofs in the Credential Request (see (#credential-request)) MUST offer a Nonce Endpoint." above in the Nonce Endpoint {#nonce-endpoint} section while not disturbing the existing optionality and whatever on nonce in the existing text with the nonce-by-error (or success) but I don't know anymore and apparently that was a dumb thing to do

Author: if it'll help move this forward, i'll commit the suggestion

* `credential_endpoint`: REQUIRED. URL of the Credential Issuer's Credential Endpoint, as defined in (#credential-request). This URL MUST use the `https` scheme and MAY contain port, path, and query parameter components.

> * `nonce_endpoint`: OPTIONAL. URL of the Credential Issuer's Nonce Endpoint, as defined in (#nonce-endpoint). This URL MUST use the `https` scheme and MAY contain port, path, and query parameter components. If omitted, the Credential Issuer does not support the Nonce Endpoint.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
* `nonce_endpoint`: OPTIONAL. HTTPS URL of the Credential Issuer's Nonce Endpoint, as defined in (#nonce-endpoint). This URL MUST use the `https` scheme and MAY contain port, path, and query parameter components. If omitted, the Credential Issuer does not support the Nonce Endpoint.
```
